# The right to trade

We seem to live in constant contradictions. On the one hand we see technological innovation, tools that would be unbelievable a decade ago. Never in history has there been 7 billion people on the planet, and never in history have we been so connected across large distances. But then there is the world of drive by poverty, market manipulation, the increasing costs of living, bills & taxes. The most basic needs for the high majority of the population take up all of their actual wage and for the average majority they are worse. One could very understandably start to question, "is there any point in working?".

Bells and whistles, doom and gloom, a random pattern that makes it impossible to see through its up and downs. I can't honestly see such a model being used across a distributed system such as our production, liberty and life, continuing for much longer without any eventual solution. It is inevitable that our social structure will evolve eventually. it will happen, and I also think I might have glimpsed how.

Traditionally, or at least the tradition of the past few 100's of years, large capital is needed for the creation of production, for testing the market. Capital for machinery, staff, research and other physical materials. If however you somehow need none of these then there is still capital for the payment of services, courses on running a business, the tax system and the legal requirements that are needed. Within the traditional methods used to test the market there is an elephant in the room, capital costs increase over time relative to society.

In 1983 Richard Stallman created the GNU Project which led to the GNU license of 1989. The license gave people to right to use, edit, share and distribute the software they created openly and freely. In 1991 Linus Torvalds created the linux kernel. Previously students, or the institutions they were tied to, would have to pay software companies in order to study and learn. It was this very issue that Linus and Stallman wanted to solve. I don't think they ever imagined what would become of it.

I don't think the end goal was to create an alternative method of production and distribution, it seems to me their main reasoning was simply to give people the right to share software, for education and trade. Within 2 years Slackware, a fully functioning operating system, was built from the Linux kernel and freely available to download, use, or even to contribute work to. In 1998 tech giants started to build their platforms to accept linux and by 2005 Linux was declared a highly successful business.

Apples and oranges?

By 2016 the model of production that was started in the late 80's has produced software for super computers, smart phones (yes including the Iphone) and in the past 10 years physical computers. Within the world of open source production new methods of measuring and gaining metrics have developed an agile philosophy that increases quality at the cost of production. This has led to this loss of production being solved through DevOps techniques, such as automating where possible and also by increasing collaboration & communication across the system.

In the realm of the open source world supply is directly related to demand, no product will ever come of the shelf in a stable state. If there is demand for it then there will be contributors and the product will improve consistently over time. It is because of this that there is no need for large capital costs, thus no unecessary complication or added stress to get ROI. A project or idea can be started by anyone, anywhere, and using capital resources that are 100% free and fully available. Even the tools to access the massive resource of open source products that can be used for prototyping, are open source in themselves, therefore as long as there is a demand for products that have been open sourced, then by its own definition access to these will improve consistently over time.

So on the one hand we have a system of production that depends, or at least creates, a compoundly growing cost of capital investment and is based on strangling production to pay for a ROI to justify and pay for this ever growing cost. On the other hand we have a system of production that is directly related to supply and demand, requires no or very little capital investment. Two completely opposing methods of production.

Two alternative methods of production, massive technological innovation and more chaotic and stress full experiences in life, that appear to becoming more and more extreme. A smartphone and internet bundle this month, basic or below basic food levels in the final week of next month. Fly to abroad on holiday this month, can't afford to visit wedding in a few months time. It is like our life is increasingly jumping between caveman and futureman.

There was a time when our species wasn't the tool making homid that we are today. In mathematics, thanks to Alendar Lyapnov, there is the equation for subsystems of dyanic or non solid systems as they go from one state to another. Alexandar come to this realisation whilst watching smoke. As the smoke hoops that were swaying to the left, changed to swign to the right, they went through a chaotic entropy going from one subsystem (swiging left) to an opposing subsystem (swiging right). Non tool making species, tool making species. Caveman and futureman all within the one month.

If Alexandar's theories fitted on the timeline of human advancement then the obvious end goal of the system is the tool making species. It is in this end goal that everybody would have the right to trade, to prototype, to learn and collaborate, and especially to trade. Everybody should have a right to trade, learn, teach and innovate. Its through our new means of production that we are allowed to make these utopian abilities a reality.
